Slide 73:  ANTs for pulmonary imaging

(Brief history of ANTs):
ANTs was conceived and initially developed in order to perform accurate image registrations
on neuroimaging data.  This work consisted primarily of the well-know Symmetric Normalization
algorithm developed by Brian Avants and Jim Gee at PICSL with much clinical input pushing
the need for accurate registrations coming from neurologist Murray Grossman.  However, given
the general utility of the SyN algorithm, it was soon adopted by PICSL lab member,
Tessa Sundaram, for performing diffeomorphic registrations (transforms with differentiable
inverse transforms) for lung data.  Thus, although most of the forces driving ANTs work
were primarily neuroimaging-related, as will be shown on the next few slides, one can apply
domain-specific knowledge to extend ANTs tools to other domains (such as the
lung).

Slide 74:  ANTs core tools for lung image analysis

Image registration is an obvious first choice for inclusion in a comprehensive toolkit for
medical image analysis.  But after initial development of a stable registration tool, it
became obvious that other data manipulation tools were absolutely essential to put together
pipelines or workflows for doing large scale processing to ultimately obtain quantitative
of clinical interest.  For example, N4 bias correction was developed by our group to remove
the inhomogeneity associated with MRI acquisition.  N4 is an extension of the well-known
N3 algorithm developed at the Montreal Neurological Institute and, like many other tools,
was motivated *not* as a means to formulate the best algorithm but because the current
implementation was inadequate in some form or another.

(top left) N4 has proven to have a significant impact in the lung-domain by "cleaning up" inhomogeneity
in functional (hyperpolarized gas) imaging (as shown here) and in 1H MRI.

(bottom left) Atropos, our segmentation tool, was also developed initially for n-tissue
brain segmentation.  However, it was discovered to have an immediate impact for
ventilation-based segmentation in hyperpolarized gas imaging.  We discuss this further
in a subsequent slide.

(top center) One of the benefits of open-source is the community that open develops around such
efforts.  At a recent conference, one of the ANTs developers was offered some code for
spatially adaptive denoising to put in ANTs.  We welcome such contributions.  The code was
rewritten in an ITK/ANTs style and has been adopted within a couple segmentation
pipelines for improved results including lung CT image registration and segmentation.

(bottom center) Recent work within the neuro community has highlighted the importance of
incorporating prior knowledge into medical image analysis tasks.  Such intuition has proven
highly effective in multi-atlas label fusion approaches where annotated atlas libraries
are registered to a target image and the warped segmentation labels are intelligently fused
to produce a target segmentation.  Again, this had an immediate impact for the lung community
in providing a framework for lung and lobe estimation.  More on this later.

(right)  Another well-known tool in the ANTs toolbox is the template-generating functionality
which permits the construction of optimal shape/intensity multi-modal templates which often
serve as the normalized statistical coordinate system for performing longitudinal or groupwise
voxel-based analysis.

Slide 75:  Functional ventilation

Shown here is a single subject from a longitudinal study using hyperpolarized gas imaging.
One of the objectives of this study is analysis of the localized lung ventilation before,
after, and after a delayed time period of albuterol administration.  Shown at the top are
the hyperpolarized 3He images normalized to the longitudinal template.  On the bottom are the
corresponding segmentation slices where a rough clinical labeling is as follows:

red = no ventilation
green = hypoventilation
blue & yellow = normal ventilation

Notice how ventilation improves with albuterol administration but then regresses somewhat
after a delay.

Slide 76:  Lung and lobe estimation

One of the recent publications from our group concerned the task of lung estimation in
1H MRI.  Our functional imaging analysis workflows are very much dependent on whole lung
segmentation in the 1H MRI given the simultaneous acquisition of 1H/3He MRI.  In other words,
since the anatomical and functional images reside in the same space at acquisition, we can
segment the proton MRI to provide a whole lung mask for functional image segmentation.
We use the joint label fusion approach discussed earlier to obtain the
left/right lung segmentation in a given target image.  Additionally, this framework can be
used to give a good estimate of the lobes even when anatomical information (such as the
fissures) is absent given the modality (such as 1H) or in cases of pathology (such as CT).

Slide 77:  Good results on 1H MRI

Shown here are the evaluation numbers for the joint label fusion approach described
on the previous slide.  This evaluation was done by comparing the segmentation results
with those obtained during the LOLA11 challenge representing the state-of-the-art lung
*CT* segmentation strategies.  The LOLA11 numbers are given in parentheses.  Note how
well the JLF numbers compare given the relative limitations of proton MRI compared with CT
in the lung (i.e., inhomogeneity, lower resolution, relative intensity scale).  The use
of prior knowledge significantly reduces the standard deviation across subjects implying
comparatively excellent robustness.


Slide 78:  Combining ANTs lung functionality I

Ultimately, the goal of these tools are to optimize the clinical measures of interest
so these tools are often organized together in optimal pipelines for producing
clinically usable data.  This is work we did looking at the longitudinal treatment effects
of a particular drug on a certain lung disease.  Each subject was imaged 5 times and the
drug was administered on a schedule such that the expected treatment effect (simplified)
was as provided in the lower right.  At the first two time points, we expected baseline to
be lower than time points 3 and 4.  At time point 5, the effect of the drugs were expected
to have been reduced.  We wanted to quantify the local effects of this drug treatment which
we were able to do using ANTs tools.  (top left) First, a multi-modal template (statistical coordinate
system) was created for each subject.  (bottom left) Second, each spatially normalized,
4-D longitudinal data set was segmented as a single unit using our N4/Atropos segmetnation
strategy.  The segmentations were then used to create normalized intensity images which
we call "expected ventilation" images (continuous values in the range [1,4] where 1 is
limited ventilation and 4 is normal ventilation).  At each voxel, we can see how its longitudinal
intensity covaries with the simplified expected treatment hypothesis and calculate a correlation
value.  (top right) These correlation maps can then be plotted in the space of the multi-modal template
to illustrate variation in treatment response.

Slide 79:  Combining ANTs lung functionality II

This is another application of ANTs tools for determining airway pathway to a specific
ventilation defect.  Ventilation-based segmentation is used to identify ventilation
defects (red areas on the segmentation maps provided a couple slides back).  Airways are
segmented using the corresponding CT image.  The functional and anatomical information are
co-registered and rendered showing the defect/airway correspondence.
